 Cell Cycle
ISSN: 1538-4101 (Print) 1551-4005 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/kccy20
Acetic acid eﬀects on aging in budding yeast: Are
they relevant to aging in higher eukaryotes?
William C. Burhans & Martin Weinberger
To cite this article: William C. Burhans & Martin Weinberger (2009) Acetic acid eﬀects on aging
in budding yeast: Are they relevant to aging in higher eukaryotes?, Cell Cycle, 8:14, 2300-2302,
DOI: 10.4161/cc.8.14.8852
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.4161/cc.8.14.8852
Published online: 15 Jul 2009.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 522
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kccy20 [Cell Cycle 8:14, 2300-2302; 15 July 2009]; ©2009 Landes Bioscience
2300 Cell Cycle 2009; Vol. 8 Issue 14
In a recent issue of Cell Cycle, Burtner et al. presented evidence 
that the accumulation of acetic acid in stationary phase budding yeast 
cultures is “the primary mechanism of chronological aging in yeast”. 1 
Burtner et al. suggest that “how acetic acid-induced cell death could 
contribute to aging in higher organisms is not readily apparent.” We 
also recently investigated the effects of pH on chronological lifespan 
(CLS) of budding yeast. The results of our experiments and those of 
previous studies point to a mechanism of acetic acid toxicity in yeast 
related to the induction of growth signaling pathways and oxidative 
stress. These mechanisms are relevant to aging in all eukaryotes.
CLS is defined as the length of time budding yeast cells survive 
after undergoing a nutrient depletion-induced arrest of the cell cycle 
in stationary phase. To simplify discussion, we refer to this arrest 
as “growth arrest.” As in the experiments of Burtner et al. buffering 
medium to maintain a higher pH lengthened CLS compared to CLS 
in unbuffered medium (Fig. 1A). Buffering medium also inhibited the 
age-dependent accumulation of reactive oxygen species detected by 
the fluorescent probe dihydroethidium, which is mostly sensitive to 
superoxide anions (Fig. 1B). Thus, the accumulation of acetic acid in 
stationary phase induces oxidative stress, a factor previously impli-
cated in chronological aging of yeast and aging in other organisms 
as well.
Buffering medium also increased the frequency with which cells 
arrest growth in G
1 when they enter stationary phase, as indicated 
by a reduced number of stationary phase cells with microscopically 
detectable buds (Fig. 1C). Counting budded cells underestimates the 
number of stationary phase cells that fail to arrest in G
1, because cells 
with small buds are difficult to detect. It also does not account for a 
potential reduction in the number of budded compared to unbudded 
cells associated with apoptotic cell destruction, which occurs more 
frequently in stationary phase populations enriched for cells with 
buds.
2 In fact, staining cells with the DNA stain propidium iodide 
(PI) to detect dead cells that have lost membrane integrity—which 
includes cells at late stages of apoptosis—revealed a minimum two-
fold increase in the rate at which cells with visible buds compared to 
those without visible buds were dying in unbuffered stationary phase 
cultures (Fig. 1D). Since cells with small buds are difficult to detect, 
some of the PI-stained cells without visible buds were also likely to 
be cycling when they died. In contrast, in buffered stationary phase 
cultures, a significant difference was not detected in PI staining of 
cells with or without visible buds (Fig. S1). These findings indicate that 
the accumulation of acetic acid in stationary phase cultures inhibits 
growth arrest of cells in G
1 and is preferentially toxic to cells that fail 
to undergo a G1 arrest.
The data of Burtner et al. show that osmotic stress or mutational 
inactivation of conserved growth signaling pathways (deletion of 
genes encoding the AKT homologue Sch9 or the RAS homologue Ras2) 
confer resistance to acetic acid toxicity in stationary phase cultures via 
undefined mechanisms. They also show that caloric restriction extends 
CLS by reducing the accumulation of acetic acid in stationary phase 
cultures. Deletion of SCH9 induces the superoxide dismutase Sod2 in 
stationary phase cells.
3 Since oxidative stress is increased by acetic 
acid in wild type cells (Fig. 1B), induction of Sod2 in sch9Δ cells could 
explain some of the resistance of this strain to acetic acid toxicity. 
However, similar to the effects of buffered medium on stationary phase 
G
1 arrest described above, CLS extension by deletion of SCH9, RAS2, 
increased osmolarity or by caloric restriction are all accompanied by 
more frequent stationary phase growth arrest in G
1.4 Together with 
the findings reported here, these and other findings described in this 
earlier study point to DNA replication stress—i.e., inefficient DNA 
replication—arising downstream of growth signaling that inhibits G
1 
arrest in stationary phase as an additional component of the lifespan-
shortening effects of acetic acid in chronological aging experiments. 
This conclusion is supported by the recent discovery of a distinct popu-
lation of “non-quiescent” stationary phase cells that, in addition to its 
enrichment for budded and apoptotic cells, exhibits elevated expres-
sion of genes encoding proteins that respond to replication stress.
2
A role for acetic acid in the induction of growth signaling path-
ways and replication stress in yeast is not surprising. In budding 
yeast and many other fungi, intracellular acidification—which occurs 
when acetic acid is introduced into medium
5—activates the same 
highly conserved Ras2 and cAMP-dependent signaling pathways that 
respond to glucose.
6 Thus, despite the absence of glucose (which has 
been completely consumed), nutrient-depleted stationary phase cells 
are continuously subjected to acetic acid-induced growth signals that 
promote entry into S phase, but in the absence of nutrients or the regu-
latory mechanisms required for the synthesis of dNTPs and efficient 
DNA replication. This is a recipe for replication stress.
In the context of the well-documented stimulation of growth 
signaling pathways by intracellular acidification in yeast and evidence 
for the induction of replication stress in stationary phase cells, it’s 
likely that the resistance to acetic acid toxicity in sch9Δ and ras2Δ 
cells reported by Burtner et al. is related in part to reduced growth 
signaling that promotes the more frequent growth arrest in G
1 we 
detected earlier in these strains. 4 This would protect against acetic 
acid-induced replication stress. The more efficient stationary phase G1 
arrest induced by osmotic stress is expected to similarly protect against 
acetic acid-induced replication stress, perhaps through its induction of 
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor Sic1. Sic1, which blocks entry 
into S phase, is required for a Hog1-dependent G
1 arrest induced by 
osmotic stress.7 Hog1 also confers resistance to acetic acid toxicity in 
cycling cells.5 Whether deletion of SCH9 or RAS2 activates Sic1 is 
not known; except for our study,4 efforts to understand the role of Sch9 
and other growth signaling molecules in CLS have focused on inhibi-
tion of Sod2 and other oxidative stress responses. Based on studies 
Letter to the Editor
Acetic acid effects on aging in 
budding yeast
Are they relevant to aging in higher eukaryotes?
William C. Burhans* and Martin Weinberger
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology; Roswell Park Cancer Institute; Buffalo, 
NY USA
Key words: aging, chronological lifespan, replication stress, osmotic 
stress, caloric restriction, oxidative stress, ROS
*Correspondence to: William C. Burhans; Department of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology; Roswell Park Cancer Institute; Buffalo, NY 14263 Tel.: 716.845.7691; 
Email: wburhans@buffalo.edu
Submitted: 04/23/09; Accepted: 04/27/09
Previously published online as a Cell Cycle E-publication: 
http://www.landesbioscience.com/journals/cc/article/8852 Acetic acid and aging in budding yeast
www.landesbioscience.com Cell Cycle 2301
of the mammalian homologues of Sch9 
and Sic1 (AKT and p27), however, this 
is likely to be the case—AKT inhibits G
1 
arrest in mammalian cells by inhibiting 
the activity of p27.
8
Are the CLS-shortening effects of 
acetic acid in yeast relevant to aging in 
higher eukaryotes? Although acetic acid 
is not a specific physiological trigger 
of growth signaling pathways in more 
complex organisms, induction of mito-
genic signaling by low pH has been 
reported in higher eukaryotes, where 
it contributes to a variety of patho -
logical states related to aging, such as 
inflammation and cancer. This includes, 
for example, activation by low pH of 
AKT and cellular proliferation in Barrett’s 
esophagus, a precursor to esophageal 
cancer for which chronic acid reflux 
is a major risk factor.
9 Extracellular 
acidification—which is detected in many 
solid tumors—also has been linked to 
proliferation of medulloblastoma cells by 
triggering the formation of IP3, a potent 
activator of AKT, and activating the 
MEK/ERK mitogen signaling pathway.
10 
There are many other examples in the 
literature of the induction by low pH 
of RAS, cAMP and/or AKT-dependent 
mitogenic signaling pathways associ-
ated with cancer, chronic acidosis-related 
diseases or regulation of differentiation 
during embryogenesis.
Even more relevant is the fact that 
growth signaling through conserved 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1) path-
ways regulated by AKT, RAS and cAMP 
and other molecules is a well-established 
factor in aging in all eukaryotes. Growth 
signaling through these pathways also 
contributes to neurodegenerative and 
other age-related diseases, including 
cancer.
11 Similar to the Sch9-dependent 
inhibition of both Sod2 expression 
and G
1 arrest that occurs in response 
to growth signaling by acetic acid in 
stationary phase yeast cells, growth 
signaling through AKT in mammals 
suppresses MnSod and other oxida-
tive stress responses,
12,13 in addition 
to inhibiting p27 and G 1 arrest. 8 Also 
similar to the effects of acetic acid in 
yeast stationary phase cells, replication 
stress arises in differentiating mamma-
lian cells that normally arrest growth in 
G
1, but inappropriately arrest growth 
in S phase downstream of sustained 
growth signaling by RAS, AKT and other 
oncogenes at early stages of cancer.
14 A role for replication stress 
in aging of higher eukaryotes has not yet been explored. However, 
longevity-promoting NAD-dependent deacetylases counteract the 
effects of growth signaling through AKT and other proteins by inducing 
p27 and G
1 arrest, in addition to oxidative stress responses.15,16 The 
induction of p27 and G 1 arrest by NAD-dependent deacetylases—
which is rarely described in discussions of the longevity-promoting 
capabilities of these proteins—likely promotes longevity by protecting 
Figure 1. Effects of buffering pH in yeast chronological aging experiments. (A) Viability of BY4741 wild 
type cells cultured in synthetic complete (SC) medium 4 for indicated times in the absence (“unbuffered”) 
or presence (“buffered”) of 50 mM citrate-phosphate buffer (pH 6.0). The osmolarity of unbuffered 
medium was adjusted with sorbitol to maintain the same osmolarity as buffered medium. Viability was 
measured as colony-forming units. Data represent averages and standard deviations of three biological 
replicas. Unbuffered cultures achieved a final average pH of 3.19, and buffered cultures achieved a 
final average pH of 5.26. Similar results were obtained in a second genetic background (DBY746; not 
shown). (B) Reactive oxygen species in aliquots of 25,000 cells from buffered or unbuffered cultures 
were measured by flow cytometry at the indicated times of medium depletion using dihydroethidium 
(DHE). Y axis indicates number of cells producing DHE fluorescence signals in individual channels of 
the flow cytometer; X axis indicates channels detecting progressively higher levels of DHE fluorescence 
and is scaled exponentially. (C) The fraction of visibly budded cells (“% visible buds”) was determined 
microscopically at indicated times in aliquots of 500 or more cells from each time point. Data represent 
averages and standard deviations in three biological replicas. (D) Viability of cells with or without visible 
buds was assessed by staining aliquots of cells collected at indicated times with propidium iodide (PI) fol-
lowed by microscopic examination with appropriate filters. Total cells counted in each sample exceeded 
2,000 cells. Data are representative of results in 4 biological replicas. Additional PI staining data are 
presented in Figure S1.
 Acetic acid and aging in budding yeast
2302 Cell Cycle 2009; Vol. 8 Issue 14
against replication stress. Also relevant here is the observation that 
caloric restriction—which prolongs the lifespan of most, if not all, 
organisms—induces a “metabolic checkpoint” that (similar to the more 
frequent stationary phase G
1 arrest induced by caloric restriction in 
nutrient-depleted yeast cells4) drives mouse cells into G 1. Abrogation 
of this checkpoint leads to growth arrest in S phase followed by 
apoptosis.
17
In summary, Burtner et al. raise an important question about the 
relevance of acetic acid effects in the yeast chronological aging model 
to aging in higher eukaryotes. Results presented here and in related 
studies that were not cited by Burtner et al. indicate that in yeast, 
accumulation of acetic acid in stationary phase cultures stimulates 
highly conserved growth signaling pathways and increases oxidative 
stress and replication stress, all of which have been implicated in 
aging and/or age-related diseases in more complex organisms. Low 
pH also stimulates growth signaling pathways in mammals. Although 
the reduced production of acetic acid identified by Burtner et al. as a 
factor in the CLS-extending effects of caloric restriction in yeast may 
be specific for this organism, the underlying mechanism by which this 
protects against chronological aging is likely to be same as for caloric 
restriction in higher eukaryotes—that is, reduced growth signaling that 
inhibits both oxidative and replication stress. The remarkable parallels 
between regulation of chronological aging in yeast and of aging in 
more complex organisms suggest that conserved growth signaling 
pathways impact aging in all eukaryotes via dual effects on oxida-
tive and replication stress. The yeast chronological aging model will 
likely continue to provide insights that will guide us toward a better 
understanding of these and other aspects of aging and age-related 
diseases.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by a NCI Cancer Center 
Support Grant (P30 CA016056) to Roswell Park Cancer 
Institute.
Note
Supplementary materials can be found at:
www.landesbioscience.com/supplement/BurhansCC8-14-Sup.pdf
References
 1. Burtner CR, et al. Cell Cycle 2009; 8:1256-70.
 2. Allen C, et al. J Cell Biol 2006; 174:89-100.
 3. Fabrizio P, et al. Genetics 2003; 163:35-46.
 4. Weinberger M, et al. PLOS One 2007; 2:748.
 5. Mollapour M, et al. FEMS Yeast Res 2006; 6:1274-80.
 6. Thevelein JM, et al. Mol Microbiol 1999; 33:904-18.
 7. Zapater M, et al. Cell Cycle 2005; 4:6-7.
 8. Chu IM, et al. Nat Rev Cancer 2008; 8:253-67.
 9. Beales IL, et al. BMC Cancer 2007; 7:97.
 10. Huang WC, et al. Curr Biol 2008; 18:781-5.
 11. Burhans WC, et al. Nucleic Acids Res 2007; 35:7545-56.
 12. Miyauchi H, et al. EMBO J 2004; 23:212-20.
 13. Nogueira V, et al. Cancer Cell 2008; 14:458-70.
 14. Halazonetis TD, et al. Science 2008; 319:1352-5.
 15. Brunet A, et al. Science 2004; 303:2011-5.
 16. Wang F, et al. Aging Cell 2007; 6:505-14.
 17. Jones RG, et al. Mol Cell 2005; 18:283-93.